Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 209,
Advanced OpenGL Optimizations.
I'm Travis Brown.
I'm sure by now you know what I do,
so we'll cover that.
But this is a really good session
for you to attend because we're going
to be talking about the techniques
to optimize OpenGL on Mac OS X.
And I want to just make a couple
quick comments and get out
of the way because we sort of
have a supersized session here.
So we're going to try to fit it
in the allotted amount of time.
It's going to be a
little bit of a struggle,
but we've got great content.
But the key thing I want to sort of
point out is that one of the advantages
Apple has in terms of our implementation
of an operating system is that we deliver
the driver and also the OpenGL stack.
And because of that,
we're able to put in certain fast
paths that enable you to really
unlock incredible performance out
of the latest generations of GPUs.
And since we also work on the operating
system and create our own tools,
we have a tool chain that's
available to you to be able to
really take a look at how your
OpenGL application is performing,
debug it, and also just unlock it so it
runs as wide open as it can.
So it's my pleasure to
welcome John Stauffer,
the manager of the
OpenGL engineering team,
to the stage to take you
through the presentation.
Thank you, Travis.
As Travis said,
I manage the OpenGL engineering
team at Apple,
and this is going to be a
session on optimizing OpenGL,
trying to get the most out
of OpenGL on the Macintosh.
So what we're going to go over today is
we're going to try to cover some basics.
We're going to try to move through
those as quickly as possible and get
into some techniques that you'll want
to try to leverage in your application
to get the maximum performance.
So some of those things are
optimizing texture uploads,
optimizing your vertex data throughput,
optimizing for one-shot images.
If you're just blitting an image up to
the screen and you want to dispose of it,
that's what I call a one-shot image.
Optimizing for copy pixels,
if you want to move pixels around,
how do you do that quickly?
Using threads in OpenGL.
OpenGL is thread-safe,
and a great way to leverage
our systems is to use threads.
And lastly, we're going to go into
the OpenGL Profiler,
which is a tool you can use to
hopefully animate your application.
So you can analyze and look for hotspots,
look for blocks in your code where
it may be blocking up against OpenGL.
Okay, so the goals of optimizing,
there's a couple goals.
One is to maximize
performance of your rendering.
So you may want to get
maximum performance,
and that means utilizing the
CPU and GPU in a combination that
will get you that performance.
Another possible goal is
to minimize CPU burden.
So it's a little different.
Maybe sometimes they
result in the same code,
but sometimes they don't.
And to minimize CPU burden usually
means maximize burden on the GPU.
You may want to have a technique to
offload as much burden on the GPU,
leaving the CPU free
for doing other work.
So key concepts to keep
in mind while I'm talking.
Keep these things in mind so
that hopefully the concepts I'll
be presenting will make sense.
If I'm not pointing
them out as a mistake,
I'm not going to be able to do that.
I'm going to be as clear as I need to be.
Eliminating CPU copies is a
key goal to any optimization.
You want to reduce the amount
of times you're touching data.
So you want to move
it through the system,
get it to where it needs to go,
and start operating or
start drawing on it.
Cache static data in VRAM.
So the video card has a higher
memory bandwidth than system memory.
So if you have static data,
an ideal place to do it, to put it,
is up in video memory.
Put it in video memory, leave it there,
and draw with it from there.
And you'll get dramatically
higher performance,
as I'll show in some of the demos.
Maximize asynchronous
behavior between CPU and GPU.
That's key.
You've got two asynchronous
pieces of hardware.
You're going to want
to stay asynchronous.
You're going to want to run
one in parallel to the other.
You're not going to want to
block against each other.
That's a key concept to
getting maximum performance.
And again, like I said,
using threads is a concept that
can be beneficial at times.
So basic things to avoid.
So we're into the basics of
just a general overview of
what we don't want to do.
And what you usually don't
want to do is call geoflush.
Flush is a command buffer
up to the hardware.
It uses resources in the driver.
It can cost you a little bit of
function overhead getting into
the driver to make that happen.
Don't do it unless you have to.
There's a couple reasons
you might have to.
We'll cover those a little bit later.
In general, avoid it.
Never call geofinish.
I frankly don't know of any cases
where geofinish is really required.
There's other ways to do it,
possibly more efficiently.
Avoid calling georeadpixels.
Georeadpixels is only really required
when you want to take the pixels back off
the video card and save them somewhere.
Save them for later.
But if you're going to use an
algorithm for rendering an effect
and you have readpixels in there,
you probably want to look
for a better way to do it.
Like caching the data somewhere else
in the video card and then reusing it
by just copying it out of that cache
on video memory back into your scene.
Avoid immediate mode drawing.
So immediate mode drawing is when
you use a GL begin and GL end and you
have a series of vertices and colors.
You put in between those the begin end.
There's one caveat to that.
You can use immediate mode
drawing in display lists.
We have a post processor
that will go through,
take that begin end sequence,
post process it, optimize it,
cache it in video memory for you.
So display lists are static data.
You can't modify display
lists once you've created it.
So by definition,
it fundamentally is static.
So we will treat it like static data,
cache it in video memory.
So display lists is a good
place to put your static data.
Minimize state changes.
So state changes in the
hardware can be expensive.
The more complex the hardware gets,
the more expensive they tend to get.
So therefore,
you want to group your rendering
according to state change.
There's usually a hierarchy
of how you want to group it.
Maybe like group it by texture,
group it by blending modes,
group it by drawing method
where you coalesce your
type of primitive triangles,
quads.
But coalescing your database
according to state will cause less
state transitions in the hardware,
and that can be very
beneficial to performance.
Okay, so jumping into optimizing
texture uploads.
First, what we're going to go through
is we're going to do an overview
of the texture pipeline,
and we're going to talk
briefly about that.
And then we're going to go into
texture optimization basics,
just some overview of
what we want to look at.
And then we're going to go
into some OpenGL extensions,
and we're going to break those
down into two categories.
We're going to break them down
into Power of Two extensions
and Non-Power of Two extensions.
There's ways to optimize
slightly differently for
those two different cases.
Okay, so the open gel pipeline
generally looks like this.
For this part of the talk,
for optimizing texture uploads,
we're going to focus in
on the pixel pipeline.
So we're going to focus in on the
highlighted yellow boxes there.
And to zoom in on that a little
bit and talk a little more in
depth on what happens while the
data is moving through the system,
here we have a basic block diagram.
And each block on this diagram,
oval or block, the data may be copied.
So you have the application,
you the application has
a copy of the texture.
You hand it to OpenGL.
OpenGL may make a copy of the data
and store it in the framework.
When it goes to draw it,
the driver may make a copy into
some harder or specific format
for uploading to video memory.
And then, of course,
video memory has a copy, right?
So theoretically,
it's possible that you might have up to
four copies in your system at some point.
So the goal of some of this discussion
is how to avoid some of that and
how to control how that operates.
Okay, so basics.
So again, like I said,
we want to minimize
CPU copies and conversions.
It is possible that you pass data
that is not necessarily in the
format that the hardware wants it,
and we'll have to do a conversion.
So you're going to want to pick
data formats that are optimal,
and I mentioned some here.
The BGRA unsigned int 8888 reverse,
BGRA unsigned short 1555 reverse,
and the YUV format for YCBCR data.
Those formats can be used for
fast paths through the system,
and without any other types of
state that may cause conversions,
those do not need to be converted for the
hardware to natively understand those.
Okay, so like I said before,
you'll want to avoid geofleshes,
but there are exceptions.
And one exception is when you
have the GPU asynchronously
reading data from your data cache,
so if you have a texture and the
GPU is going to read directly from it,
you want to stay
asynchronous with the GPU.
So you may have to double buff your data.
For instance, you may have to have
texture one and texture two,
and while the CPU is uploading
or working on texture one,
you'll have the GPU, which is going to be
working on texture two.
And we're going to go
into more details here,
but I wanted to mention it,
so you'll keep it in mind as we
look at some of the diagrams.
Okay, so double buffering.
So like I said, what you want to do is,
to stay asynchronous,
you want to have double
buffering of the data.
So if you double buffer your data,
it looks like this, right?
A few OpenGL extensions of how to
optimize your texture pipeline.
Apple Client Storage Apple Client
Storage is where you tell OpenGL that
I will allocate a piece of memory
and I'll keep it around and you
can just have a pointer to it.
So we will retain a pointer to your data.
We will not copy the data
and retain it locally.
So that requires that you retain your
copy of the texture until you delete it,
because we're going to be referencing it.
Another extension is Apple Texture Range.
That has a couple interesting
modes that you can define.
One is cached,
which means that you're going to
want the data cached in video memory.
One is shared, where it says that I don't
want it cached in video memory.
I want you to leave it in AGP space.
Don't put it in video memory.
And what Texture Range does is
it defines a region of memory.
You put a texture there.
We will map that region of memory
in AGP space and leave it there.
So that the GPU is able
to come and DMA directly.
from that piece of memory without us
having to copy it out of that region
of memory and put it into AGP space.
We will map that memory
directly in AGP space.
Okay, so if we look at what these
extensions do to the stack,
so client storage,
what it does is it bypasses one
copy that a texture may undergo.
So it goes from the application
to the driver without having
to be copied by the framework.
So that will automatically increase
your performance if you happen to be
incurring a copy in the framework.
We'll go over some sample code.
It's pretty easy to enable.
All you have to do is make a single call.
When you bind to a texture,
you make a call to enable client storage,
and you just set it to true.
Okay,
the texture range and rectangle texture.
Now, rectangle texture,
that extension is for allowing some
hardware to do direct DMA of the texture.
And the reason for that
is that some hardware,
the power of two textures,
and to define what power of
two is versus non-power of two,
is that power of two meaning a power
of two width height versus rectangle,
which means any dimension, right,
is not restricted to a
power of two dimension,
is required by some hardware to do
direct DMA because some hardware requires
a hardware-specific format for the
data to be in before it can upload it.
So, therefore,
rectangle texture is required when you
use texture range to get direct DMA.
And you'll need to use
those in conjunction.
And when you do,
you can bypass a driver's copy.
So now we've showed how to
bypass two independently.
And looking at the sample
code for texture range,
like I said, there's the cached hint.
And the cached hint in this
case is for storing the data.
It's up in video memory.
And it's for non-power of two.
And if we look at the shared hint,
here's how you set it.
It's the same.
It's just that you have a,
instead of cached hint,
you have a shared hint.
And just for those that,
if I'm going too fast,
there's sample code that'll
be up on the website.
You can look at that.
And it has all these features.
So don't get too worried about
writing these things down.
You can reference the sample code.
Okay,
so if we use those two in conjunction,
we end up bypassing all the copies.
We end up going straight from
your copy of the texture,
directly into video memory.
And therefore, the GPU is directly
DMAing from your memory.
So the GPU and the application are
directly talking to one another.
OpenGL fundamentally has
been moved out of the way.
OpenGL did the setup,
but the transfer is happening between
your application and that GPU.
Okay,
so looking at putting this all together
and looking at a little bit of a piece of
code that does all these things together.
For non-power of two,
the first thing we do is we're going
to bind to a rectangle texture,
and then we're going to
set up the cached hint,
and that is going to work in
conjunction with the client storage,
which is next on the fourth line.
And between those two,
that's going to set up for a direct DMA.
And then when we call the text image
2D with a rectangle texture target,
it is going to set up the GPU for
a direct DMA of your texture from
directly DMAing it from your memory,
right?
So pretty simple to do,
but this particular setup that I'm
showing right now does require that you
are going to be using rectangle texture.
And you'll want to read the rectangle
texture specification because
it does have some restrictions.
It does have some
restrictions on functionality,
so it's not quite the same
as a power of two texture,
which allows for MIT maps,
allows for different
clamping modes and such.
So you'll want to read the
extension and see if rectangle
texture suits your needs.
Okay, so for power of two,
it's slightly different, but not much.
All I did here in this piece of code,
different from the previous one,
is change rectangle
texture to texture 2D.
And texture 2D then allows me
to... Use a power of two texture,
get some of the additional functionality
that power of two textures bring to me,
but it won't give you a direct DMA.
It's going to incur one copy,
so it's not going to be
quite as fast performance.
Typically, we see that as okay because
rectangle textures are usually okay
for things like video and such.
Games like Quake 3 are
going to use power of two,
and they're going to load them at
the beginning of the game or a level,
and you're not going to need to do
real-time texture loading as much.
So rectangle textures is
very powerful for playing.
You can play video,
playing through images that you
want to get to the screen fast,
which typically are non-power of two.
Okay,
so let's switch to the demo machine.
I'm going to show you a demo of that.
Okay, so the first thing we're going
to do is just look at this
and explain what the demo is.
This demo, it's hard to see,
but it has numbers in
the middle of that image.
The numbers go from 1 to 5,
and it is uploading a 1024,
even though it's a small window,
it is a 1024 by 1024 32-bit image.
It is uploading it across AGP bus and
blending it on the screen every frame.
So, you can see that we're getting
about 650 megabytes a second,
and you'll also see that
we've got a couple sliders.
I can switch from single buffered
all the way up to five buffers to
test the different effects that
may have on the parallelization
of the hardware and the CPU.
You can also see a frame rate
slider and a number of check boxes
turn off the different extensions.
So, the frame rate slider goes
all the way up to 1,000.
We actually had to add
that to test the G5.
But we're on a G4,
so we're going to keep it in the middle.
So the interesting note here is,
like I had said, is that the idea is to
eliminate CPU copies.
Well, this actually eliminates
all the CPU copies,
right?
And you can see that the CPU monitor
is showing very little activity.
The CPU actually isn't doing much here
other than running the event loop and
drawing a little quad on the screen.
So the CPU's been effectively removed
from the bulk of the work of this demo.
Now, if we turn off, say,
all the extensions,
let's just start turning
these things off.
You can see that our performance
dropped from 650 megabytes a second
down to 111 megabytes a second.
And you can see now we have
effectively saturated one CPU.
So now we're a single-threaded app.
We've taken one CPU.
We are basically memory-bound by a
CPU copying the data to get it into a
format that can be uploaded by the GPU.
So with those extensions, again,
I'll turn them back on,
not only do you get higher bandwidth,
but you save CPU work, right?
Because you're not using a CPU,
and you're getting higher throughput.
So for people who are able to
use some of these extensions,
you can get quite a benefit.
Okay, back to the slides, please.
Okay, let's jump into optimizing
vertex throughput.
Optimizing vertex throughput
actually is very parallel to
optimizing texture throughput,
and you'll see as I go through the slides
that it parallels the same concepts.
In fact, we did that on purpose so that
it has very analogous concepts.
Okay, so we're going to look at an
overview of the vertex pipeline.
We're going to go through some of the
basic optimizations that can be done.
We're going to go through some
of the APIs that can help you,
and we're going to break this
into a couple categories,
static and dynamic, and display list.
So those are three separate categories
we're going to touch on that will,
slightly different techniques
for each of those categories.
Okay, again, same pipeline.
This time we're going to focus in on
the display list and the vertex path.
Let's get into the basics.
For minimizing the
CPU copies for vertex data,
just like pixel data,
you're going to want it into a
format the hardware understands.
A safe data type is GeoFloat.
If you keep all your data in GeoFloats,
you're pretty safe.
All the hardware knows
how to read GeoFloats.
If you start using doubles or bytes
for vertex data or some combination
that's a little bit off the normal,
the driver may say,
I can't directly upload this to the GPU.
I may have to do a CPU copy,
do a conversion,
maybe some slow conversion.
You may find your performance dismal.
So stick with GeoFloats.
That's a guarantee to be
one of the faster paths.
Use vertex arrays.
So like I said before,
stay away from immediate mode drawing,
just because that encourages...
You may have to do some more overheads,
overhead, per function call overhead
and some other overhead I'm
going to go into in a minute.
So use the standard GL array
function calls and maximize
your vertices per draw command.
So I will show some performance charts
in a little bit that will show the
benefit of maximizing the number of
vertices you passed OpenGL at one time.
So for instance,
instead of drawing one quad at a time,
if you draw 100 quads at a time,
you'll get dramatically better
performance because you're lowering
per function call overhead.
You're lowering... You're
lowering the driver having to do
work on a per primitive basis.
Cache your static data VRAM.
We've already said that.
And use vertex programs
to offload your CPU work.
I'm going to show a demo in a
bit that will show how you can do
actual work with vertex programs
and freeing up CPU cycles,
not just in the data transfer aspect,
but actually in the effects that you
may want to do with your application.
Okay, and again, the same thing,
double buff your data.
It's analogous to the textures,
and we have the same double buffer
data diagram where if you have
the GPU reading your data directly
out of your application's memory,
you're going to need to have some
isolation between the asynchronous
behavior of the GPU and your application.
So you're going to want
to double buff your data,
give the CPU a buffer to work on
while the GPU is working on a buffer,
and toggle them back and forth.
So when you do that,
you get asynchronous behavior,
you can get some significant
performance improvements.
We'll show some of
that in a demo as well.
You'll notice I have a geoflush there.
What you want to do is when the
CPU's done with doing some work,
you'll want to get that data
in flight to the graphics card.
So as soon as the CPU's done,
issue geoflush, send it on its way,
and hopefully you've done a
substantial amount of work where
you're not calling flush too
often because that will hurt you.
Again,
very much like the texture pipeline.
When vertex data comes
through the pipeline,
it can go through multiple copies,
depending on what APIs you're using
and how the data is formatted.
So, we can end up with the data
going from your application,
and if it's going to media mode,
OpenGL is required to capture
the current vertex state.
So, we retain a golden image of
basically the current vertex state
when you're running a media mode.
If you're running vertex arrays,
we don't have to do that.
So, the first copy we have to do is into
a local storage of a single vertex
instance of a current vertex state.
So, we incur that one copy if
you're going to media mode,
and then we're going to have to copy it
to a format for the hardware to upload.
So, we're going to have to copy
it somewhere into AGP space
for the hardware to DMA it up,
and then eventually it
makes it to the GPU.
So, if you use vertex arrays,
you immediately just
eliminate that one copy,
and that one's easy to do.
Immediate mode's an
easy one to work around.
No extensions needed,
just use the right API.
Okay, so let's talk a little
bit about dynamic data.
Analogous to the texture range
extension we previously talked about,
we have a vertex array range extension.
And it is exactly parallel.
It has the same storage hints
where you have a shared hint for
leaving the data in AGP space.
And that's what you're going
to want to do for dynamic data.
You're not going to want to
necessarily cache it in video memory.
You're going to want to
leave it in AGP space.
And what happens there is that
you've allocated an array of
memory in your application.
We come along, we map that into AGP,
we wire it down,
and then the application can come
along and poke values into it,
tell the hardware, I'm done with that,
issue a draw command, we'll DMA it up.
And therefore, the GPU is reading
directly from your arrays,
and it never makes it in video memory.
And for dynamic data, obviously,
that could have a benefit,
that you don't want it to
be cached in video memory,
because you're going to change
it again the very next frame.
Okay, so what does it look like
if we use that extension?
We have vertex arrays and we
use the vertex array range.
And just like texture range,
we bypass all the copies in the driver
and we're DMAing directly from your
copy of the application's arrays.
So we can get very high
throughput doing that,
very low CPU work is going on.
Okay, so looking at a little bit
of sample code for that.
The first two calls are just a
standard vertex pointer setup,
standard OpenGL for
setting up a vertex array.
The next two calls then is
setting up a vertex range.
And what you do is you pass
it in a size and a pointer,
and you tell us what memory to map in.
So you're just going to give
us a pointer with a size,
and we're going to map that memory in.
And then the last call
on this is a flush.
Now, that's an important call,
because every time you change that data,
you're going to have to
tell us you changed it.
And what we'll do with that is
potentially flush hardware GPU caches,
or we may DMA it to some other location.
But what's important with that
is that you have to tell us
the areas that you've changed.
So every frame that you come along,
and you write some more vertices,
and you change that data,
you have to tell us the
pointer and the size offset,
the size from that pointer
that you want us to flush.
You've changed it.
We will then know that that has
changed and update the hardware.
Okay, so static vertex data.
Very similar.
You can use the vertex array range,
but instead of using the shared hint,
you can use the cached hint.
And what will happen is that
when you define the vertex array,
if it has a cached
hint and you say flush,
then we'll know that you've changed it.
We will DMA a copy up into video
memory and we'll keep it there.
Every time you call flush, though,
we will have to re-DMA that
back up into video memory,
but it'll be cached in video memory,
and if you're going to draw
from it multiple times,
it's quite a benefit because you're
not having to re-read that data
across the AGP bus every time.
Instead, what you're doing is you're
local to the video cards bus,
which is a very high-speed bus.
And like I said previously,
you can use display list with begin end.
The one caveat for using display list is
that we do have an optimizer that goes
back through the data and parses it and
reconfigures it into an optimal format.
You can fool that optimizer.
And what you want to avoid is
using inconsistent vertex data.
And what I mean by that is that if you
go through GL begin and you say GL color,
GL vertex, GL color, GL vertex,
that's consistent.
Inconsistent would be GL begin, GL color,
GL vertex, GL vertex, GL vertex,
GL vertex.
You did a color for the first
vertex but not the following ones.
You may fool the optimizer into
not being able to handle that.
So if you want to play it safe,
just keep it into consistent
formats and the optimizer will
definitely be able to take that data,
pack it into a format that
we can then categorize.
cache and video memory and you
can get optimal performance.
So one last caveat then for display
list is that there's a minimum
threshold for which it's worthwhile
for us to work on the data.
And that threshold is 16 vertices.
If you have less than 16 vertices,
we won't even consider optimizing it.
And that's just,
we just found that out by testing
different machines and finding out where
the threshold was and deciding that,
you know, if it's not going to give
you performance benefit,
in fact,
it can actually slow you down because of
other overhead of doing work on the data,
that 16 was the minimum.
Okay,
so what does that diagram look like then?
So when using static data with
either display lists or with
the cached vertex array range,
what happens is the data gets
de-emated into video memory,
and then the GPU draws from that, right?
So it's gonna be taking the data from
the video memory cache and drawing.
So you get very high throughput for
data that you draw more than once.
And the sample code for that, again,
it looks like for static data,
we're setting up a standard vertex array.
Again, we set up the hint.
This time, the hint for the vertex
array range is cached.
It's not shared like it was for dynamic.
And like before,
we set up the vertex array
range pointer in size,
and then again, we tell it to flush.
And again, the flush, this time,
instead of just,
the flush is going to cause
us to re-upload that data.
So if it's not there already,
we'll upload it.
If you have touched the data
again and it was uploaded,
we'll refresh it with another copy.
So it's like a text sub-image
call where we're going to refresh
the data on the video memory.
Okay, so for basic review of what
display lists look like,
it's pretty simple.
You just call begin list,
draw your drawing,
and then call end list,
and you can pack anything
you want in there.
It takes any OpenGL calls.
If you put your geometry in
between begin list and end list,
hopefully we'll be able to optimize
it and get it cached in video memory.
Okay, so looking at what this can
do for you for performance,
this is a chart of low
vertex count performance.
So on the x-axis, we have the number of
vertices per draw command,
and on the y-axis,
we have millions of triangles.
So as you can see,
the orange is immediate mode,
and orange tops out pretty
quickly as to what benefit you
can get by going down that path.
And the red, then, is vertex arrays.
Vertex arrays has a little bit
lower per function call overhead,
a little more,
give you a little more performance.
But if you look at the blue,
the blue is vertex array range.
Vertex array range has great
potential for performance,
and it doesn't give you a whole
lot until you start giving OpenGL a
lot of work to do at one time.
So that's the key.
The key is giving
OpenGL lots of work to do.
So you can see here,
I'm giving OpenGL lots
of work at one time,
and then the green, the top one,
is displayless.
So, you know, it goes up to,
on this chart, it goes up to about 12
million triangles a second,
issuing 30 triangles per draw command.
Now, this is the high vertex
count performance,
and picking up a little bit
where the other one left off,
you can see that some of these
continue to grow quite a bit.
So you can see that the vertex
arrays in immediate mode stay flat.
Array range basically
grows until you're limited,
and in this case, the test I was running
was AGP bus limited.
So I limited about 640 megabytes
a second of vertex data that
I could transmit across the bus.
So I pretty much
bottlenecked that AGP bus,
and that's all the data
I could get across.
But in the display list case
that I was testing here,
the data was effectively static.
It only went across the bus once.
So the GPU was able to utilize
its internal bus bandwidth,
which in the case I was
running on an R300,
that's about 20 gigabytes a second.
So it can transfer a whole lot more data.
And you can see that at the number,
the top number I quoted here,
it was about 2.8 gigabytes a second
worth of geometry going into the GPU.
So that's quite a bit of data,
almost 90 million triangles a second.
So let's do a demo and
show a little bit of this.
Okay, so what we've got here,
if anybody that's been
in my session before,
it's the same old thing,
but next iteration of improvement.
So initially we're drawing with quads,
and we're doing the
standard basic GL begin end.
Not too impressive, we're getting about
800,000 triangles a second.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to step through the different,
as I move the slider up,
I'm going to step through
different optimizations and
using different extensions,
and we'll see what effect
that has on the performance.
Down at the bottom,
you see the color coding.
The color coding represents
where time's being spent.
So red is system time,
time spent outside the application.
Green is time spent calculating the wave,
and blue is time spent in OpenGL.
So you can see right now that I'm
spending a lot of time in OpenGL,
a lot of time calculating the wave.
So if we start moving up
the level of optimizations,
I went to quad strips.
That got us quite a bit
of speed improvement,
about 25%. And that
was pretty easy to do,
worthwhile.
But let's not stop there.
Let's keep going up.
So if we go to vertex arrays,
a little bit more.
That wasn't a great improvement.
Then we go vertex array range.
So here's where it gets interesting.
Now you can see that the
time spent in OpenGL,
which was the blue,
went from filling basically the
top of that bar almost to nothing.
So now the time spent in
OpenGL is very little,
and we're basically now saturated
on the calculation of the wave.
We are not able to calculate the wave
fast enough to get the data to OpenGL.
So if we move up one more notch,
and we see what Altevec can do to us.
So we Altevec the wave calculation,
because that was my bottleneck.
Once I optimized OpenGL,
OpenGL was no longer the bottleneck,
so the CPU was.
I optimized that,
and then we do one last thing.
Like I said before,
you may want to offload
calculations onto the GPU.
So what if we write a vertex
program to do that wave?
And now, again,
the interesting thing to watch is
that we are calculating a wave motion,
and we are sending almost 12 million
triangles a second to the screen.
And look at the CPU.
The CPU's almost doing nothing, right?
So we basically,
not only have we optimized it,
but we've offloaded the
CPU from doing any work.
Now the CPU, again,
is just doing an event loop.
CPU doesn't know that this
complex wave is being calculated.
And if we actually look
at the density of this,
it's a really dense wave.
There's a lot of triangles there.
Okay, back to the slides, please.
Okay, so let's go into a new subject,
optimizing for one-shot images.
One-shot images, again,
are images that you may have that
you want to get to the screen as
fast as you can and discard it.
You're not going to blidge
to the screen multiple times.
It's just one shot.
So one possible way of
doing that is draw pixels.
Draw pixels is fairly
effective in some cases.
It's best with small images.
If you have lots of little small
widgets you want to draw somewhere,
draw pixels is probably the
fastest way to get the data there.
It's a very optimized path, very quick.
For images larger than 128 by 128,
you probably want to start considering
doing some kind of texturing,
like our previous demo showed,
where you don't have to make a copy,
because draw pixels is going
to make a copy of the data.
The larger the image gets,
the more data there is to copy,
and your benefit for draw pixels,
for instance, is going to go down because
it will make a copy.
Okay, so the trick for one-shot images
using draw pixels is to get your
state right where you're going
to go down the optimized path.
There's different paths.
There's three different paths in
OpenGL for how to draw these things.
You want to hit the one that's fast.
So the first thing you're going to
need to do is get your state right,
and listed here is a number of
disables of things you need to
have disabled before you will
be going down the fast path.
Again,
don't worry about writing them down.
We'll have a demo posted
that you can look at.
Okay, so a little bit more code.
DrawPixel is very basic, right?
You disable some options
and you call DrawPixels.
You feed it the right pixel format type,
like we talked about before,
that will be a format that the
hardware natively understands,
and you give it the
image and off it goes.
Okay, we're gonna do another demo,
please.
- Quit it and relaunch it here.
Okay, so first thing I'm gonna do
This is a little bit strange,
but I got an infinite button,
and that infinite button
is to sit in a... Yeah,
it doesn't really go infinite.
It's going to sit in a for loop,
and it's going to beat on it really hard,
because it goes so fast that just running
through an event loop is too slow.
So it sits in a for loop really
fast and bangs on it really hard.
And I reduced the image size two by two.
Now, most of you don't see that,
but the key point here is how fast can we
really get through the stack to OpenGL?
And we can get 660,000 of these
little images up to the screen.
So you can get a lot of little
things up to the screen.
And that's one of the things to remember,
because other paths through the
system may have more per-function
call overhead and limit you
not because of the pixel data,
but because of what you have
to do to get through OpenGL.
So that's the benefit of DropPixels,
is it has a low per-function call
overhead and can get lots of little
small things up to the screen.
So if I start increasing
the size of these... Sorry,
I wanted to go a little
smaller than that.
So here's a 75 by 75 image.
Megabytes per second is
about 400 megabytes a second.
Believe it or not,
I'm already memory bottlenecked here.
I'm basically saturated my memory,
and it's no longer function call
overhead that's stopping me.
It's memory bandwidth.
Obviously, with the G5,
these numbers all change
because these go much faster.
And that's actually another trick,
is how to tune for the different systems.
It can be a delicate job.
So if you start increasing
the size of this,
we quickly... run into... some
rather slower frame rates,
right?
So now we're down to... We're
still at 400 megabytes a second.
So we have bottlenecked the memory bus.
We are just flat-lined now.
And as I increase the number of pixels,
I will proportionally decrease
the frame rate because I am
400 megabytes a second limited.
That's all I can get through the system.
That's my limiting factor.
So as I increase it, I go slower.
And that's why when you
get to larger images,
it's better to relieve the memory bus of
that work and go down the texture path.
But for small images,
DropPixels is great.
Okay, back to slides, please.
Okay, optimizing pixel copy operations.
So, there's a lot of cases where
you want to draw something,
save it off,
and then you want to be able to
grab a saved copy and blit it
back to maybe your back buffer,
use it for some part of your scene,
and you want to render it and save it.
So, one of the things you can use
to do that is copy pixels.
So, copy pixels will allow you
to do a VRAM to VRAM copy.
It's like drop pixels where you're going
to have to set up your state correctly.
One area you can store the
data is in an auxiliary buffer.
So, on OS X,
you can create auxiliary buffers.
An auxiliary buffer is
just another back buffer.
So, if you have your main back buffer,
you can create another one off to
the side and use that as a temporary
holding area for copying data into.
You can either draw to it directly or you
can copy data between your back buffers.
So, you can have a back buffer
and this auxiliary buffer.
One additional extension that
we have that allows some more
flexibility is the aux depth stencil,
which not only will it
create the back buffer,
but it'll also create the
depth and stencil buffers
associated with that back buffer.
So, you can have two depth buffers,
two stencil buffers,
and therefore you can copy your not only
color data between these aux buffers,
but you can copy depth and stencil
data and use it as a temporary holding
area for fast refresh of some pixels.
So, there's a number of techniques
that people use for interacting
with very complex objects.
So, there's a number of techniques
that people use for interacting
with very complex geometry.
That becomes an important technique.
So, like draw pixels,
there are certain states that you'll
need to have right to make it go fast.
It's very similar to draw pixel state.
And basically,
what you don't want to be doing is
you don't want to be trying to dither
or alpha test or blend or things.
Basically, what it comes down to,
you don't want to do anything that can't
be done by the 2D engine on the GPU.
Because this is a 2D operation
and we need to be able to stick
within the feature set of the 2D
pipeline on the graphics card.
So, you can have a 2D pipeline
on the graphics card.
So,
you need to disable all the operations
that require the 3D pipeline.
3D pipeline is not
going to be as optimal.
It's just a memory copy that
you can do through the 2D pipe.
So, there's a number of states
that you want to disable.
And you can look at the draw
pixels example for what state.
It's very similar.
Okay, so looking at some sample code.
Very basic.
We have the standard
disable the write state,
so you can go down the fast path,
and then when you go to draw,
you're going to want to set your
read buffer and your draw buffer.
It's just a source and destination.
Source and destination can be any
of the buffers you have allocated,
whether it's the back buffer,
aux buffer 1, 2, what have you,
and you can copy between those two.
Then you issue your copy pixels,
and the transfer will be
a VRAM to VRAM transfer.
Okay, so let's jump into using
threads with OpenGL.
So let's go over first the rules
for using threads with OpenGL,
and then we'll talk about some
possible ways to divide up your
work onto multiple threads.
And then we'll talk about what
data you can share between
those different threads,
and how to synchronize those threads.
So rules for threading.
What you can't do is
per thread re-entrance,
per context re-entrance.
So if you have an OpenGL context
and you have two threads,
only one of those threads
can be in OpenGL referencing
that context at a time.
If both threads are in
OpenGL with that same context,
you're going to cause corruption
in your OpenGL state and all
kinds of bad things can happen.
What you can do is you can share
context state across threads and you
can share surfaces across contexts.
And I'll show some diagrams of how
that can be put together to help
you with threaded applications.
Okay, so divisions of work.
One possible division of work is to move
OpenGL as a whole onto a separate thread.
This is like what Quake 3 does.
Quake 3 moves OpenGL onto one
thread and has a bunch of other
CPU work for the game logic and
other work on the other thread.
And it's a reasonable division
of work that's easy to manage.
Other more complex ways to divide
your work are to potentially
split your texture work with
your general... geometry work.
So you may have texture data that's
getting spooled off of a disk.
You may have another thread that's
doing other work for the application,
but then it comes along and uses geometry
to utilize those textures for drawing.
Another possible way to divide
the work is to split your output,
your surface.
And when I say a surface,
I mean the OpenGL back buffer
is basically the surface of
the piece of memory in video
memory that you're drawing to.
So that's what we call surface.
So you can split the
processing of a surface.
So let's say you want that you
can have your CPU work be divided
amongst regions in the surface.
Then it might be beneficial to split
those onto separate threads and leverage
both CPUs to get that work done.
Okay, so sharing data between contexts.
What gets shared?
So when you share two contexts,
when two contexts are sharing state,
the things that get
shared are display lists,
textures, vertex array objects,
and vertex and fragment programs.
So those are the things that get shared,
and those are really all objects.
Those are things that usually have a
bind and some name associated with them,
and those things are the
shared items between OpenGL.
There's lots of other state in an
OpenGL context that does not get shared,
and those are going to be per context,
even if you've set these
contexts up to share that state.
So you can share,
like I briefly touched on before,
you can share a surface between contexts.
So you can have two contexts,
multiple contexts,
drawing to the same surface.
And that's another way
to have sharing of data.
Okay,
so let's look at some of the diagrams
of how to divide up your work and
move it onto different threads.
So here's the first example of just
moving OpenGL on a separate thread.
Very basic.
You have one thread doing
work for the application.
You have another thread
that's driving OpenGL.
So thread one is generating data
that is used for input to thread
two to draw into the OpenGL context,
which goes to the surface,
which gets swapped to the frame buffer.
Okay,
you can split your texture and vertex
processing onto different threads,
different contexts.
So you can have two threads,
two OpenGL contexts.
They're sharing the same,
some of the same state, right?
They have shared state,
and they're going to be
attached to the same surface.
And what you can do is you can have
asynchronous processing between the two,
where you can have one thread
spooling data from a disk,
say, decompressing JPEGs,
decompressing a movie, what have you,
reading that data,
those textures into the
OpenGL state machine,
and then having the
other thread come along,
referencing those textures and drawing.
So that's a way to split your workload if
you have spooling or some kind of work to
do with imaging that you want to offload.
Another possibility, then,
is to use our new API for P-buffers,
where you're not reading, say, the data,
but you're using geometry
to generate a texture.
You're using some geometry
to draw into a P-buffer,
which is in video memory.
That, then, is used as a texture,
which is then referenced
by Thread1's context,
which then is drawn,
which then goes to the surface
and to the frame buffer.
So, just to be clear now,
the only difference between
these two examples is that one,
we're dynamically, this example,
we're dynamically creating
the surface by drawing to it,
the texture by drawing to it.
Previous example,
we were basically loading a
texture through the OpenGL API.
Okay, so we can also split the
OpenGL processing of a surface,
right?
So we can take the surface and we can
split it across some line and use one
OpenGL context to render one part of it
and an OpenGL context to render another.
And where this might be beneficial is
if you're CPU bound and your CPU work
could be regionally divided along some
portion of the screen real estate,
where you have a lot of work
to do geometric calculations or
what have you in one portion,
you can split that across
two CPUs and divide your work
across regions of the surface.
So one way to do that is
to just create two threads,
two OpenGL contexts,
not have the state shared,
and they're just open
loop drawing to a surface,
but they're drawing to different regions.
Now the way you separate
what regions they draw to,
you can use OpenGL.
You can use a scissor and a viewport.
So you can just set the
scissor and the viewport to
the region you want to control,
and with a scissor rack,
the pixels will not come out of that.
So you can just set it to one half
for one context and one half for the
other context and allow the drawing
to be open loop to that surface.
Okay.
Or, if your application wanted to,
you could just share state.
There's no reason you
couldn't be sharing state.
Same basic concept,
just that they're sharing
possibly geometry,
programs, textures, to do their work of
drawing into the surface.
Okay, so how do we set up
OpenGL shared context?
So here's a little bit of sample code
to show how we would create a context,
attach another context to
it as a shared context.
So this example assumes that you've
already created an OpenGL view through,
say, AppKit, and now you come to, say,
your NIT frame,
and all you're going to do is
create an NSOpenGL context.
And you can see we're
creating NSOpenGL context,
ALEC, and then we come along and
we do a NIT with format,
and we're going to take self,
the format from self.
So we're inside of a, the creation of a,
of a context,
or in a view already that has a context,
so we're just going to take the
pixel format out of that context,
and we're going to use it as the
pixel format to create a new context,
and we're going to provide the
current view's OpenGL context
as the shared context.
So we're going to create a new context.
We're going to, create,
and when we attach it, or I'm sorry,
when we create it,
we're going to hand in the pixel
format and the already created
context for sharing against the state,
and that's all you need to do to
make sure that the two are connected.
And the key line here then would be the
self OpenGL context on the third line,
which hands the new context,
the previously created
context for our sharing.
Okay, then the next two are fairly
standard OpenGL concepts where you're
just making the current context,
you're attaching it to the view.
So one small deviation on that, then,
is that if we wanted to have
two contexts that talk to a
surface but don't share state,
instead of passing in the already created
context into the newly created context,
we just pass nil,
but we attach it to the same view.
So we're creating two
independent contexts,
we're attaching it to the same view,
that will allow them to
talk to the same surface,
but be independent as far as state.
Okay, thread synchronization.
The main tool you'll have
for thread synchronization,
obviously, is going to be the
OS tools that are provided,
the OS APIs.
So you'll have NSThread and NSLock.
Those are going to be what
you'll mostly need to leverage.
There is one interesting API that
you'll want to be familiar with,
which is NSAppleFence.
AppleFence is a way to insert tokens
into the OpenGL command stream and
then to test when they're done.
So I can do a set fence and I can
test when that token I've inserted
into the OpenGL command stream
has gone through the GPU and made
a round trip and is completed.
So there's ways to test when
portions of your drawing are done,
and that's another way to
potentially synchronize events
within your OpenGL commands.
So we'll look at a little bit
of sample code how to do that.
Okay,
so there's two basic ways you can do it.
You can do it with the set fence,
which you can see here on the
first little piece of sample code,
which is I'm setting a fence,
and I'm giving it a name.
So I can give it any name I want,
and you can set that token
into the OpenGL command stream,
and then do some work and
later test to see if it's done.
So you would do a finish fence apple,
and that call will block
until that token is completed.
There's another simpler API.
If you're wanting to block against
a texture upload being completed,
or a draw against a texture,
or a draw against a vertex array object,
you can just simply test for that object.
So what you do is you call finish object,
and finish object apple,
and what you do is you pass it
in the type of target you're
wanting to look against,
or check against.
So you may have a GL texture or
a GL vertex array as the type,
and again, you pass in the ID number,
and you can see that
it's a GL vertex array.
So that'll be an ID number that
you use to create or bind to the
texture or vertex array object.
Okay,
so let's do a little bit of a demo again.
And this one is going to be
the same demo we did before,
but what we didn't show before is we
have a multi-threaded button at the top.
And I want to talk a
little bit about that.
So, if we enable multi-threading,
we can see that we went from
800,000 triangles a second to
1.5 million triangles a second.
So, we got pretty good parallelization,
right?
We almost got a 2x speed improvement
just by doing multi-threading.
So, that was pretty worthwhile.
And you can see the CPU monitor.
We're working two CPUs pretty hard.
Now, what's interesting about
this is if I increase the
optimization level of OpenGL,
if you look at the performance,
it's not doing a whole lot, right?
Well,
the problem is that the workload for
calculating the wave is the bottleneck,
right?
The drawing of the OpenGL is not.
So, we're not going to gain by
improving OpenGL because the wave
calculation is the bottleneck.
So, with the vertex array
range in the Altevec,
now we've again removed the
bottleneck of the wave calculation.
Now, multi-threading is paying off,
right?
So, now we're getting the 10.5 million
triangles a second as opposed to the 8.5.
So, it's not 2x because, as you can see,
even with Altevec, the wave calculation,
which is represented by the green,
is still significantly more
expensive than the OpenGL drawing.
So, we're going to get some benefit
by moving the system and the
OpenGL drawing off to another thread.
Okay, back to the slides, please.
Let's go into an important
subject that we wanted to
spend quite a bit of time on.
It's the OpenGL Profiler.
It's a tool that comes
with the developer CD.
It's a very powerful tool.
It does have a lot of features,
and it will take a little bit of learning
to understand how to use it effectively.
What you can use it for is optimizing,
debugging, and experimenting with
your OpenGL application.
There's a lot of
different features in it,
so the Profiler is a bit
of a restricted name.
It does a lot more than just profile.
Let's go through some of the
screens and have a brief overview
of what the Profiler can do for you.
First, the OpenGL Profiler,
like some of the other
tools in the system,
you can have it launch
your application for you.
It will launch and basically
attach to your application,
or you can attach to
a running application.
If you already have an
OpenGL application running,
you can just attach to it and
start utilizing the services of the
Profiler just by simply attaching
to a pre-running application.
One of the services it provides is it
will provide function statistics for you.
It will time in and out times of
all the OpenGL functions and provide
you counts and percent times and
overall times spent in each function.
This way,
you can quickly get an idea of which
functions you're spending time in
OpenGL and quickly get an idea of
how expensive those are for you.
It'll generate,
you can capture call traces,
so you can simply enable
call trace capture,
and it'll capture all the OpenGL commands
and their arguments so that you can
scroll through it and look what your
application is feeding OpenGL and
get an idea of the call sequence.
It will capture textures, vertex,
and pixel programs.
So you can actually run your
program and it will capture all
the textures that you've passed in.
It will capture the pixel
programs and vertex programs.
You can look at those and you can see,
make sure that you've got the textures
you think you have loaded under
the right names or what have you.
You can set breakpoints.
So you can go to an
OpenGL function and you can say,
I want a break here.
And at that breakpoint,
it will give you application call stack.
So you can see what your application
call stack was at that point.
It'll also give you a complete
listing of the OpenGL state.
So you can sit there and thumb
through the OpenGL state,
make sure that at that breakpoint,
the state is what you expected it to be.
It'll also, at a breakpoint,
let you look at the off-screen buffers.
So it'll let you look at the back buffer,
depth buffer, stencil, alpha buffer,
and you can look at it at any
point you can set a breakpoint.
It'll let you write scripts
and execute OpenGL commands.
So at a breakpoint, you can type in an
OpenGL command and say,
well, I think that state's wrong.
I'll modify it right here.
Type an OpenGL command, hit execute,
and it'll poke that OpenGL command
right into your application and
change some OpenGL state for you.
So one useful thing for this, then,
is going to be debugging.
If you think that you've got
a bug in your state setup,
you can modify it on the fly.
Scripts can be attached to breakpoints,
so they can be auto-executed if
you wanted it to be executed every
time a breakpoint came along.
The OpenGL Driver Monitor,
another powerful tool.
What this does is it attaches to the
driver itself and starts collecting
stats out of your graphics driver.
There's a number of
parameters you can monitor,
like video memory usage,
hardware wait times,
so you can watch to see if the
CPU is stalled against the hardware.
You can watch what kind of stall it is.
It breaks down into many different
categories of why the CPU may
be blocked up against the GPU.
You can try to monitor those.
You can look at bandwidth
usage of how much data you're
getting through the system,
so it'll track bytes per
second through the system.
So there's a whole bunch of useful stats.
It takes a little bit of studying
this tool to get useful data out of
it because it is somewhat complex.
So we'll go through a little
bit of that in one of our demos.
So why don't we switch to the
demo machine and let's do that.
So, quickly here,
before we go any further,
screenshots I didn't show,
you can also customize your pixel format.
So, for instance, if I wanted to make a
custom pixel format,
I can come in here and change
my pixel format attributes
that the application uses.
So,
if you have a pre-compiled application,
you can modify your pixel formats on the
fly without having to recompile them.
What you can also do is
you can emulate hardware.
Now, when I say emulate, yeah, it's neat,
but I'm going to give
you the bad part now.
All it really does is deprecate
your current hardware to
some less capable hardware.
So, for instance,
if I'm running an R300 like I am here,
and I wanted this hardware to look
to the application like a RAGE 128,
I could say,
choose driver RAGE 128 that got released,
the same feature set
that got released in,
say, OS 10.3.
And any time your application would
come along and make a query into
OpenGL for some kind of capability,
like an extension,
some kind of min-max values,
the driver will return a value
that looks like a RAGE 128.
So, if your application is coded
correctly to respect extension
strings and values that are queryable,
it's a powerful utility for
making your application think
it's running on a RAGE 128.
This was actually a feature
request from last WWDC.
So we got it in there.
Okay, so I contrived an application,
a slight variation of the texture
range demo I showed before.
And what I did is I did
what I said not to do,
and I stuck a GL finish in there.
So first thing we're going to do is
we're going to look at the statistics
that this thing's collecting.
So what do we see?
We see GL finish is taking 82%
of the percent time in GL and
40% of the application time.
So a couple values,
let's go over the screen real quick,
a couple values that are interesting
to look at when you pull the screen up.
One is the number down here,
which I highlighted.
That's the estimated
percent time spent in GL.
So that will try to estimate
how much of the time,
total time, is spent in OpenGL.
So we can see we're spending
about 60%. So that's about 67%
of the total time in OpenGL.
Of that total time,
we're spending 55%, 56%
of that in GL finish.
So somebody's calling a synchronous call
GL finish and causing the application
to stall and wait for the GPU to
flush the pipeline on that call.
So here's what we're going to do.
Since I don't like that call,
we're going to go in here and we're
going to pull up the breakpoints window,
and we're going to get rid of it.
So there's GeoFinish.
You'll notice not only can
we set breakpoints before
or after a function call,
but we can also stop executing functions.
So I'm just going to
disable that function.
This is a favorite tool at Apple,
by the way.
When we catch applications doing things,
we'll just disable it, right?
So now you can see that things
are looking a little better,
right?
So now we got rid of the GL finish.
Now we're only spending
24% of the time in OpenGL.
We're not spending the
65% that we were before.
We are spending the time
where we want to be.
We're spending it basically in GL begin,
where some real work is going on of
getting the data up to the system.
And things look good.
Now, I talked before about double
buffering and the importance of double
buffering data stays asynchronous.
Well, this application has the ability
to switch down to one buffer,
right?
So I can make it look like I'm
only feeding one buffer at a time.
And you can see I'm stuck
on buffer on texture zero.
So real quick, let's just see what the
performance impact is.
So right here,
I'm at about 500 megabytes a second.
If I'm at five, I'm at about 600,
sometimes 630 megabytes a second.
So quite a performance
difference by stalling,
having the hardware stall on the CPU,
having to prepare the next texture.
So let's look at the difference of what
the call stats will show in this case.
And what we're going to do is we're
going to pull up the driver monitor.
So let's look at a couple
of things in conjunction.
Okay.
Okay, so quickly here,
let me move this back up a little bit.
So what we're seeing here
on the driver monitor is we
have three lines I'm drawing.
I'm drawing the hardware
wait time in red,
which represents the total time the
CPU is waiting for the hardware.
And so anytime the CPU is
blocked up against the hardware,
it's going to start
registering wait time.
In the yellow,
I'm measuring texture page and bytes.
So since this is a texture demo,
it's uploading lots of textures,
I'm going to record the number of
bytes worth of textures per second
I'm sending up to the hardware.
And green is the swap complete wait time.
Now, let's see what happens.
We can see what the changes are
when I go through and go from
single buffer to double buffer,
and we can watch the effect that has
on some of the statistics and give you
a little bit of an idea of how to use
this tool and watch for the changes.
Okay, so now that was single buffered,
and you can see up in the stats
that when I'm single buffered,
I'm spending all my time
basically in GL text sub image 2D.
So as I change the
pixels for that texture,
I'm spending all my time there,
and I'm spending my time there because
I'm blocked against the hardware.
The hardware maybe hasn't
completed uploading that texture,
and the CPU is ready
to give it another one,
but the CPU has to wait for
the hardware to be done.
So we're going to block,
and that's the effect that
single buffering is doing.
Okay, so now what's happening to me
is that the CPU is not running
asynchronous to the GPU.
So now if I move this up
and I double buffer this,
we can start seeing some of the effects,
and I'm going to change a couple
options here to give me a little
bit of a better vantage point here.
Okay, so again,
the red is the hardware wait time,
and you can see that when
I went to two buffers,
you can see, and it's subtle,
so you have to watch,
you can see that the red line went down,
so I'm now waiting,
CPU's now waiting less on the hardware.
And you can see that
the yellow line went up,
meaning that I'm getting more bytes
per second up to the graphics card.
So by double buffering,
I have made myself more
asynchronous to the GPU,
allowing for better parallelization
and less blocking on the CPU's behalf.
So, there's a couple other things here.
Let's play these stats again
and just look at what effect
that had on the stats.
So,
So previously, I was spending all my
time in text subimage.
I still am.
Let's bump it up a little more
and see what happens here.
If we go up to five like we were.
So now the blocking point
switched back again.
So you can see that we're actually
able to catch the driver blocking
at different points as we move
to different numbers of buffers.
So we can see that double
buffering wasn't quite enough,
was it?
I can see that double buffering
doesn't quite get me the same
behavior that three buffers does.
Now, one thing to watch out for that can
potentially fool you is that there's
only limited numbers of different
types of resources in the driver.
As you vary the way
your application works,
you can actually start consuming
those different resources.
And when you consume a resource,
the driver's going to have to block
waiting for that resource to become free.
So what is happening here
is that as I'm only at,
say, three buffers,
I'm running out of one type of resource,
and that is I'm probably blocked up
against the hardware waiting for the
completion of that command buffer.
But when I go to five buffers...
It changes because I believe I'm
blocked against swap buffers.
There's a particular packet type in
the driver that is needed to swap,
and there's only four of them.
When I switch up to
five different buffers,
I've now made the CPU so
asynchronous that I'm running out
of a different type of resource.
I'm so separated from the hardware
that I'm consuming a driver resource
that is making me block somewhere else.
So the key points here, though,
are hardware wait time is
always a good one to look at,
and what kind of byte
throughput you're getting.
So you can look at a variety of
different stats for byte throughput.
Let me pull up the different stats here.
So we can look at Command Bytes
GL if we wanted to.
For instance, if I poke that down there
and I disable this other one.
That one's not very interesting.
Actually looks like a bug.
In any case, there's lots of different
stats you can put up in here.
And we're going to be releasing
another version of this that has
a little more descriptive names,
hopefully with some better information.
They are a little bit cryptic.
If you need some more
detailed information,
don't be afraid to post information
up onto the OpenGL mailing list.
Can I switch back to the slides, please?
Okay, so let's wrap up.
Okay, so texture optimizations.
The goal is to minimize your
CPU copies of pixel data.
There's different ways to
optimize for power of two,
non-power of two.
Vertex optimizations,
you'll want to use the vertex
array range for dynamic data
with the shared storage hint.
And for static data,
use the vertex array range with the
cache storage hint or display list.
Offload the CPU onto the
GPU with vertex programs,
free up some work onto the GPU.
Use threads.
You can share different types
of data between threads,
surfaces, context data.
Draw pixels for one-shot images
and copy pixels for fast VRAM to
VRAM copies of your data,
of your pixels.
Use the OpenGL Profiler to find
hotspots and points in your code that
may be getting blocked in OpenGL.
And with that,
if you have more questions,
you can contact myself or Travis Brown.
So, quickly, references.
We got the OpenGL org
webpage that you can go to.
We have the Apple developer page.
And we have some Apple documentation
that is available on the developer page.
And with that, I'm going to bring
Travis up for the road map.
All right, we're rapidly running out of
sessions at this year's WWDC.
Let me actually skip forward.
The next session in the
Graphics and Imaging track isn't
specifically related to OpenGL,
but it's certainly a popular session
nonetheless as Mac OS X printing.
Tomorrow, again,
we have Introduction to Core Services,
which is if you're a game developer or a
full-screen OpenGL application developer,
please attend the session.
We'll be covering the core APIs that
the system uses to do display
configuration and management.
Our hardware partners from ATI are going
to give us a presentation on Friday.
Well, actually, tomorrow is Friday.
It's Cutting Edge OpenGL Techniques,
where they're going to really show
us some of the absolute latest
things they're able to do with
their current Radeon products.
We also have a session on accessibility.
This actually will contain
some content that may be of
interest to game developers,
because we'll be covering,
at least in a slide or so,
issues affecting using
assistive technology,
which is software that adapts
the function of the computer
with OpenGL applications that
take over the full screen.
We have a suggestion there
for some possible ways that
you can ensure compatibility.
And then we have, historically,
the last session of WWDC,
which is the Graphics and
Imaging Feedback Forum.
If you want to voice opinions,
give suggestions, please take the time to
attend the feedback forum,
because that's where we get a lot
of the information that we use to
create great new features in the
operating system for next year.